Add vitest plugin for testing full workflows without setting up a server (#1237)
vercel/workflow: docs/content/docs/testing/index.mdx

  - /docs/observability
---

Testing is a critical part of building reliable workflows. Because steps are just functions annotated with directives, they can be unit tested like any other JavaScript function. Workflow DevKit also provides a Vitest plugin that runs full workflows in-process — no running server required.

This guide covers two approaches:

1. **Unit testing** - Test individual steps as plain functions, without the workflow runtime.

> 2. **Integration testing** - Test entire workflows in-process using the `workflow()` Vitest plugin. Required for workflows that use [hooks](/docs/foundations/hooks), webhooks, [`sleep()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow/sleep), or retries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Integration testing** - Test entire workflows in-process using the `workflow()` Vitest plugin. Required when you want to test workflow specific code paths, like those using [hooks](/docs/foundations/hooks), webhooks, [`sleep()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow/sleep), retries, etc.
```

(metadata, locks, etc. are all relevant here but we dont' need to list everything)

</Callout>

## Integration Testing with the Vitest Plugin

For workflows that rely on runtime features like [hooks](/docs/foundations/hooks), [webhooks](/docs/foundations/hooks#understanding-webhooks), [`sleep()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow/sleep), or error retries, you need to test against a real workflow setup. The `workflow/vitest` plugin handles everything automatically — it compiles your workflow directives, builds the runtime bundles, and executes workflows entirely in-process. No server required.

<Callout type="warn">
Inside integration tests, which run the full workflow runtime, `vi.mock()` and related calls do not work. To test steps with mocked step dependencies, use [unit tests](#unit-testing-steps) instead. Instead of using mocks in integration tests, consider dependency injection or environment variable-based conditional logic.

> </Callout>

Author: It doesn't work for first-party code, but it _might_ work for third-party dependencies. We should extend the vitest workbench app to add an import for an npm package and then mock it out, and then test whether the mock works. If yes, we should update this Callout to be more specific. If not, let's document that case too in the markdown file inside the vitest workbench.

### Vitest Configuration

Create a separate Vitest config for integration tests that includes the `workflow()` plugin:

```typescript title="vitest.integration.config.ts" lineNumbers
import { defineConfig } from "vitest/config";
import { workflow } from "@workflow/vitest"; // [!code highlight]

export default defineConfig({
  plugins: [workflow()], // [!code highlight]
  test: {
    include: ["**/*.integration.test.ts"],
    testTimeout: 60_000, // Workflows may take longer than default timeout
  },
});
```

That's it. The plugin automatically:

1. Transforms `"use workflow"` and `"use step"` directives via SWC
2. Builds workflow and step bundles before tests run

> 3. Sets up an in-process workflow runtime using a fresh [Local World](/docs/worlds/local) instance in each test worker

Reviewer: (if you've already implemented this, ignore me. I'm just reading the docs rn - not the code yet). 
consider any doc updates based on my questions as you see fit :)

<Callout type="info">
Use a separate Vitest configuration and a distinct file naming convention (e.g. `*.integration.test.ts`) to keep unit tests and integration tests separate. Unit tests run with a standard Vitest config without the workflow plugin, while integration tests use the config above.
</Callout>

### Writing Integration Tests

> Use [`start()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/start) to trigger a workflow and `await run.returnValue` to get the result:

Reviewer: let's cross link to `run.returnValue` docs in API reference? (so people/agents can figure out that it will block till ready, and throw if the workflow fails, etc.)

```

<Callout type="info">
[`start()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/start), [`resumeHook()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/resume-hook), and [`getRun().wakeUp()`](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api/get-run) are the key API functions for integration testing. Use `start()` to trigger a workflow, `resumeHook()` to simulate external events, and `wakeUp()` to skip `sleep()` calls so tests run instantly. `waitForSleep()` and `waitForHook()` from `workflow/vitest` let you wait for the workflow to reach a specific point before resuming. See the [API Reference](/docs/api-reference/workflow-api) for the full list of available functions.
</Callout>

### Testing Webhooks

> Webhooks are hooks that receive HTTP `Request` objects. In tests, resume them using `resumeHook()` with a `Request` payload — no HTTP server needed:

Reviewer: we have `resumeWebhook` actually and we should use that. I think this is the only valid usecase for resumeWebhook.

1. it's already type safe
2. it will correctly only resume webhooks (and not normal hook)
